[IMP] accounting/l10n_mx: additional context (#5975)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/finance/fiscal_localizations/mexico.rst

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To start invoicing from Odoo, a customer invoice must be created using the :doc:`standard invoicing
flow <../accounting/customer_invoices>`.

While the document is in draft mode, changes can be made to it (the correct :guilabel:`Payment Way`
or :guilabel:`Usage` that the customer might require can be added, for example.)

After you :guilabel:`Confirm` the customer invoice, a blue message appears stating: :guilabel:`The
invoice will be processed asynchronously by the following E-invoicing service: CFDI (4.0)`.

Pressing the :guilabel:`Process Now` button sends the document to be signed by the government. On

> success, the :guilabel:`Fiscal Folio` field appears on the document, and the XML file is attached in

Reviewer: Hello @larm-odoo ! The latter would be the correct option.  👍

   corresponding invoices.

Invoice cancellations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is possible to cancel the EDI documents sent to the |SAT|. According to the `Reforma Fiscal 2022
<https://www.sat.gob.mx/consultas/91447/nuevo-esquema-de-cancelacion>`_, since January 1st, 2022,
there are two requirements for this:

- With all cancellation requests, you **must** specify a *cancellation reason*.
- After 24 hours have passed since the creation of the invoice, the client **must** be asked to
  accept the cancellation.

There are four different cancellation reasons. In Odoo, you can cancel invoices with the reasons *01
Invoices sent with errors with a relation*, and *02 Invoices sent with errors without a relation*.

The following sections break down the process of canceling invoices for each cancellation reason in
Odoo.

.. important::
   Odoo has certain limitations to canceling invoices in the |SAT|: The reasons 03 and 04
   (*Operation did not take place* and *Nominative transactions related to a global invoice*) are
   not currently supported by Odoo. For this, you need to cancel the invoice directly in the |SAT|,

>    and use a *Server Action*.

Author: @feav-odoo ok cool, so I can remove the whole _important_ admonition block?
```rst
.. important::
   Odoo has certain limitations to canceling invoices in the |SAT|: The reasons 03 and 04
   (*Operation did not take place* and *Nominative transactions related to a global invoice*) are
   not currently supported by Odoo. For this, you need to cancel the invoice directly in the |SAT|,
   and use a *Server Action*.
```

>    and use a *Server Action*.

Reviewer: It's still important, as we need to address that the other reasons (03, 04) still won't work with this version of Odoo! 
(They will be in Odoo 17 btw)
Something like...

```
.. important::
   Odoo has certain limitations to canceling invoices in the |SAT|: The reasons 03 and 04
   (*Operation did not take place* and *Nominative transactions related to a global invoice*) are
   not currently supported by Odoo. For this, you need to cancel the invoice directly in the |SAT|,
  and press :guilabel:Retry in the :guilabel:SAT Status field..
```
...would do it.

   itself. You can find your company's contact in :menuselection:`Accounting --> Customers -->
   Customers`.

The fields :guilabel:`Locality` and :guilabel:`Colony Code` are optional and can be added in the
company directly in :menuselection:`Settings --> General Settings --> Companies`. These two fields
have to coincide with the data in the |SAT|.

.. image:: mexico/mx-external-trade-rescompany.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Optional external trade company fields.

To configure the contact data for a foreign receiving client, navigate to :menuselection:`Accounting
--> Customers --> Customers`, and select the foreign client's contact. The contact must have the
following fields completed to avoid errors:

#. The entire company :guilabel:`Address`, including a valid :guilabel:`ZIP` code and the foreign
   :guilabel:`Country`.
#. The format of the foreign :guilabel:`VAT` (tax identification number, for example: Colombia
   `123456789-1`)
#. In the :guilabel:`MX EDI` tab, you need to address if the customer receives goods for a period of
   time temporarily (:guilabel:`Temporary`) or permanently (:guilabel:`Definitive`).

.. important::

>    If the new contact was created by duplicating from another existing contact from Mexico, make

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If the new contact was created by duplicating another existing contact from Mexico, make
```

>    sure to delete any carried over information from the :guilabel:`Fiscal Regime` field. As well, do

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   sure to delete any carried over information from the :guilabel:`Fiscal Regime` field. In addition, do
```

>    not use the :guilabel:`No Tax Breakdown` option. Selecting this option hides mandatory fields

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   not enable the :guilabel:`No Tax Breakdown` option. Selecting this option hides mandatory fields
```

   that are required for external trade contact configuration.

.. image:: mexico/mx-external-trade-customer-contact.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Required external trade customer fields.

.. note::

>    In the resulting XML and PDF, the :guilabel:`VAT` is automatically replaced by the generic VAT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   In the resulting XML and PDF files, the :guilabel:`VAT` is automatically replaced by the generic VAT
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before creating an invoice, it is important to take into account that external trade invoices
require to convert the amounts of your product into USD. Therefore, :doc:`multicurrency
<../accounting/get_started/multi_currency>` **must** be enabled and *USD* **must** be activated in
the :guilabel:`Currencies` section. The correct :guilabel:`Service` to run is :guilabel:`Mexican
Bank`.

Then, with the correct exchange rate set up in :menuselection:`Accounting --> Settings -->
Currency`, the only fields left are :guilabel:`Incoterm` and the optional :guilabel:`Certificate
Source` in the :guilabel:`Other Info` tab.

.. image:: mexico/mx-external-trade-other-info.png
   :align: center
   :alt: External trade Other Info tab of a product.

> Finally, sign the invoice with the same process as a regular invoice, and press the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, sign the invoice with the same process as a regular invoice, and click the
```

:guilabel:`l10n_mx_edi_stock_40` have to be installed.

In addition to this, it is necessary to have the :doc:`Inventory
<../../inventory_and_mrp/inventory>` and :doc:`Sales <../../sales/sales>` apps installed, as well.

.. important::
   Odoo does not support Carta Porte type document type "I" (Ingreso), air, or marine transport.
   Consult your accountant first if this feature is needed before doing any modifications.

Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Odoo manages two different types of CFDI:

- **No Federal Highways**: Is used when the *Distance to Destination* is `less than 30 KM
  <http://omawww.sat.gob.mx/cartaporte/Paginas/documentos/PreguntasFrecuentes_Autotransporte.pdf>`_.
- **Federal Transport**: Is used when the *Distance to Destination* exceeds 30 KM.

Other than the standard requirements of regular invoicing (The |RFC| of the customer, the UNSPSC
code, etc.), if you are using *No Federal Highways*, no external configuration is needed.

For *Federal Transport*, several configurations have to be added to contacts, vehicle setups, and
products. Those configurations are added to the XML and PDF files.

Contacts and vehicles
*********************

> Like with the external trade feature, the :guilabel:`Address` in both your company and your final

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like the external trade feature, the :guilabel:`Address` in both the company and the final
```

All fields are mandatory to create a correct delivery guide.

.. tip::
   The fields, :guilabel:`Vehicle Plate Number` and :guilabel:`Number Plate`, must contain between
   5 to 7 characters.

> In the :guilabel:`Intermediaries` section, you need to add the operator of the vehicle. The only

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the :guilabel:`Intermediaries` section, you must add the operator of the vehicle. The only
```

mandatory fields for this contact are the :guilabel:`VAT` and :guilabel:`Operator Licence`.

.. image:: mexico/mx-delivery-guide-vehicle.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Delivery guide vehicle configuration.

Products
********

Similar to regular invoicing, all products must have a :guilabel:`UNSPSC category`. In addition to
this, there are two extra configurations for products involved in delivery guides:

- The :guilabel:`Product Type` must be set as :guilabel:`Storable Product` for stock movements to be
  created.
- In the :guilabel:`Inventory` tab, the field :guilabel:`Weight` should have more than `0`.

.. warning::
   Creating a delivery guide of a product with the value `0` will trigger an error. As the
   :guilabel:`Weight` has been already stored in the delivery order, it is needed to return the
   products, and create the delivery order (and delivery guide) again with the correct amounts.

.. image:: mexico/mx-delivery-guide-products.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Delivery guide product configuration.

Sales and inventory flow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create a delivery guide, first, you need to create and confirm a sales order from

> :menuselection:`Sales --> Sales Order`. This generates a :guilabel:`Delivery` smart button. Press

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:menuselection:`Sales --> Sales Order`. This generates a :guilabel:`Delivery` smart button. Click
```

it, and :guilabel:`Validate` the transfer.

After the status is set to :guilabel:`Done`, you can edit the transfer, and select the
:guilabel:`Transport Type` (either :guilabel:`No Federal Highways` or :guilabel:`Federal
Transport`).

If your delivery guide has the type :guilabel:`No Federal Highways`, you can save the transfer, and

> then press :guilabel:`Generate Delivery Guide`. The resulting XML can be found in the chatter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then click :guilabel:`Generate Delivery Guide`. The resulting XML can be found in the chatter.
```

.. note::
   Other than the :guilabel:`UNSPSC` in all products, delivery guides that use :guilabel:`No Federal
   Highways` do not require any special configuration to be sent to the government.

If your delivery guide has the type, :guilabel:`Federal Transport`, the tab :guilabel:`MX EDI`

> appears. There, write a value in :guilabel:`Distance to Destination (KM)` bigger than `0`, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
appears. There, write a value in :guilabel:`Distance to Destination (KM)` bigger than `0`, and
```
```suggestion
appears. There, enter a value in :guilabel:`Distance to Destination (KM)` bigger than `0`, and
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to track the correct customs number for a specific invoice, Odoo uses :doc:`landed costs
<../../inventory_and_mrp/inventory/management/reporting/integrating_landed_costs>`. Go to

> :menuselection:`Inventory --> Configuration --> Settings --> Valuation`, and make sure that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:menuselection:`Inventory --> Configuration --> Settings --> Valuation`, and make sure that the
```

<../accounting/get_started>`.

You can find the *Chart of accounts*, *Trial Balance Month 13*, and *DIOT* reports in
:menuselection:`Accounting --> Reporting --> Mexico`.

.. important::
   The specific characteristics and obligations of the reports that you send might change according
   to your fiscal regime. Always contact your accountant before sending any documents to the
   government.

.. _l10n_mx/chart-of-accounts:

Chart of accounts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :doc:`chart of accounts <../accounting/get_started/chart_of_accounts>` in México follows a
specific pattern based on |SAT|'s' `Código agrupador de cuentas
<http://omawww.sat.gob.mx/fichas_tematicas/buzon_tributario/Documents/codigo_agrupador.pdf>`_.

You can create any account, as long as it respects |SAT|'s encoding group: the pattern is
`NNN.YY.ZZ` or `NNN.YY.ZZZ`.

.. example::
   Some examples are `102.01.99` or `401.01.001`.

When a new account is created in :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Chart of
Accounts`, with the |SAT| encoding group pattern, the correct grouping code appears in
:guilabel:`Tags`, and your account appears in the *COA* report.

> Once you created all your accounts, make sure that you put the correct :guilabel:`Tags` in them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you created all your accounts, make sure that you put the correct :guilabel:`Tags` in them.
```
```suggestion
Once you create all your accounts, make sure the correct :guilabel:`Tags` are added.
```

.. note::
   You cannot use any pattern that ends a section with a 0 (such as `100.01.01`, `301.00.003` or
   `604.77.00`). This triggers errors in the report.

Once everything is set up, you can go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Reporting --> Mexico -->

> COA`, and press the button, :guilabel:`SAT (XML)`, to generate an XML file containing all of your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
COA`, and click the :guilabel:`SAT (XML)` button to generate an XML file containing all of your
```

accounts, which will be ready to upload to the |SAT| website.

Trial balance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The trial balance reports the initial balance, credit, and total balance of your accounts, provided
that you added their correct :ref:`encoding group <l10n_mx/chart-of-accounts>`.

> This report can be generated monthly, and an XML file version is created, if you go to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This report can be generated monthly, and a corresponding XML file is created, if you go to
```

> :menuselection:`Accounting --> Reporting --> Mexico --> Trial Balance`, and press the button,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:menuselection:`Accounting --> Reporting --> Mexico --> Trial Balance`, and click the
```

> :guilabel:`SAT (XML)`. Select the month you want to download beforehand.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:guilabel:`SAT (XML)` button. Select the month you want to download beforehand.
```

Miscellaneous --> Journal Entries`, and create a new document. Here, add all amounts to modify, and
balance the debit and/or credit of each one.

After this is done, click :guilabel:`Mark as Closing Entry`, and the report found in
:menuselection:`Accounting --> Reporting --> Mexico --> Trial Balance Month 13`, contains the total
amount of the year, plus all the additions of the journal entry.

The XML file is generated by pressing the :guilabel:`SAT (XML)` button.

.. image:: mexico/mx-reports-trial-balance-13.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Trial Balance Month 13 setup.

.. image:: mexico/mx-reports-trial-balance-13-report.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Trial Balance Month 13 report.

General ledger
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By law, all transactions in Mexico must be recorded digitally. Since Odoo automatically creates all
the underlying journal entries of your invoicing and payments, you can export your journal entries
to comply with |SAT|'s audits and/or tax refunds.

.. tip::
   You can filter by period, or by journal, according to your current needs.

To create the XML, go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Reporting --> Audit Reports --> General

> Ledger`, and press :guilabel:`XML (Polizas)`. Here, you can select between four types of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ledger`, and press :guilabel:`XML (Polizas)`. Here, you can select between four types of
```
```suggestion
Ledger`, and click :guilabel:`XML (Polizas)`. Here, you can select between four types of
```

~~~~~~~~~~~

The DIOT (Declaración Informativa de Operaciones con Terceros / *Informative Declaration of
Operations with Third Parties*) is an additional obligation with the |SAT|, where the current status
of creditable and non-creditable payments, withholdings, and refunds of VAT from your vendor bills,
are provided to the |SAT|.

Unlike other reports, the |DIOT| is uploaded to a software provided by the |SAT| that contains the
A-29 form. In Odoo, you can download the records of your transactions as a :file:`.txt` file that
can be uploaded to the form, avoiding direct capture of this data.

The transactions file contains the total amount of your payments registered in vendor bills, broken
down into the corresponding types of IVA. The :guilabel:`VAT` and :guilabel:`Country` is mandatory
for all vendors.

To get the |DIOT| report, go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Reports --> Mexico --> Transactions

> with third parties [DIOT]`. Select the month that suits you, and press :guilabel:`DIOT (TXT)` to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with third parties [DIOT]`. Select the month that suits you, and click :guilabel:`DIOT (TXT)` to
```
